Hello friends, how are you all? My name is
Advocate Aman Kishore, and in today's video,
we're going to talk about insurance claim
rejection. I believe you've all had
insurance at some point,
and many times your insurance
claim gets rejected. There are
many reasons for claim rejection, and
insurance companies often reject your claim and
eat your money. So,
how can you file a complaint against them?
In today's video, we're going to
talk about that topic. The
video is going to be very interesting,
and I'm going to tell you all the points about
how you can file your own complaint.
Without wasting time, let's
start the video. Many people,
after their insurance claim is rejected,
go directly to the consumer court and
file a case. You
can file a case in the consumer court, but there's
a complete process for that. According to the correct process,
you have to
take some steps before filing a case in the consumer court,
and that is mandatory.  If you do not do this,
you will not be able to win your case in the consumer court.
If any of your
insurance claims is rejected, then the
first step you have to take is to
register your complaint with the insurance company's grievance cell.
For this, you can simply use email
or send a handwritten or
typed complaint to your insurance
company. As per
insurance norms,
if any of your complaints reaches the grievance cell, then they have to
reply to you
or provide a solution within 15 days. If
you get a solution, then it is well and
good, but if you do not get any reply or
solution, then after that you have to
move towards step two. Now, if you do
not get any response from the insurance company's grievance cell within 15 days or
maximum 30 days, then in step two,
you simply have to register your complaint with IRDAI i.e.
Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India through the online portal.
How to file a complaint? The entire portal will be flashing on your screen.
You can see that the
first thing you need to do is type IRDAI in your browser, which means
Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India. You can see that
its official link has opened here.
After this, you simply scroll up
and you will see the
option of Grievance Redressal, which
you have to open. Now a
page like this will open in front of you, in which
you can simply register your complaint.
But before registering the complaint,
you will have to download a form on which
you have to fill in your details, which
you can download by simply clicking on Click Here.
This form will be something like this, on which
you have to fill in all your information.
After filling up the form,
you can attach a complaint to it and send it to this email
or if you
want to send it by post, you
can send it to this address. Otherwise, you can also use the Bima Bharosa
System.  You can register your complaint using
IRDI.
Even after following both the steps mentioned above, if you do not get any solution, then
you simply have to come to step three.
In step three, you have to register your complaint with CI i.e. Council
for Insurance U Buchman,
which you
can do online as well as offline by
going in hard copy and submitting it or via
post. Simply you have to
open your browser and type in
Council for Insurance U
Buchman. As soon as you do this, you can see that the
first link that appears in front of us is
Home CI Insurance U Buchman. You have to
click on it. You can see that
some instructions have appeared in front of us here, if you
want, you can read them.
We will simply close it.
After closing, we have to scroll up
and you can see that there is a way to submit
the complaint here. So you
can register your complaint online as well as
offline. If you want to register a complaint online, then
you simply have to
click on this.  Here
you can see, click on it. After that, you will see a
page open in front of you which has
instructions written on it, which you should
read beforehand. After reading the instructions,
you simply have to enter your mobile number here
and submit. After that,
your registration will be done. You have to create your ID and
register your complaint online.
Now let's talk about
how you can submit offline.
For offline, you can register your complaint through email,
post, or even directly by
walking in to the insurance officer's office.
If you want to see
where their office is in the jurisdiction of your area, then simply click on Click Here
for Details and you
can see that different states have come up here.
Now, for an example, I will
show you by clicking on Delhi.
In Delhi, you can see that
all the details of our insurance officer have
come to us. We
can visit them directly or by going to their email.  You
can also create your complaint and send it to them. After filing the complaint,
you can also track your complaint through For Tracking
Your Complaint, click here
and you can see
what is the status of your complaint. Insurance
Unchman is a middle man who will
mediate between you and your insurance company and will take you to a
solution. The
decision of the Insurance Unchman is binding, which means
you cannot go against that decision in the court. Insurance
Unchman mostly listens to the insured person, i.e. the person
whose claim has been rejected.
You simply have to
fill all your details briefly in your complaint and send it to them.
I would suggest you that if possible,
you should get this complaint drafted by an advocate or
any professional
who has knowledge about this loss.
After this, you simply have to forward your complaint to them
and within 30 days
You have to wait. As soon as you get some
response or you will get an
update through email or message about
which day you have to
visit the insurance company. Whenever you
visit there, your opposite party i.e. the
insurance company will also be called there
and one of their representatives will also
come there and a settlement will be made between you two
and you will be given justice. Now coming to
step four, let me make one thing clear to you in advance
that you can follow the
step which I am going to tell you now even before step three
or even after step three
i.e.
before going to the insurance company, you can try step four
and even after that, its result will be almost the
same. So step four is sending a legal
notice to the insurance company. Now, in this legal
notice, you have to clearly mention
that if you do not get a solution, then
you are going to
take some legal action against this insurance company and are going to
take them to the court. In this notice, if you
wish, you can ask for compensation.  You
can also specifically mention your demands. One
suggestion for all of you is that you should get the legal notice
drafted by an advocate only. Do
not make the mistake of drafting and sending the notice yourself because companies
quickly understand which
legal notice has been professionally drafted by an advocate
and which one by a normal
person. So, always take the help of an advocate
and get the legal notice drafted and send it to the
insurance company through speed post.
Now, if
you do not get a good solution even after following the above four steps, then
we come to our last step
which is file a consumer code case through
e-filing portal. If you want, you
can also file your case in the consumer court by going physically and if you wish,
you can also file your consumer case online using the e-filing portal.
We have already made an explanatory video on this. If you
want, you can click on the i button above
and
watch our video in which I have taken you
step by step.  The process is explained as to
how you can file your e-filing case without the help of any lawyer.
Also, share the video,
subscribe to the channel and do
not forget to press the bell notification so that you keep
getting notifications of all our upcoming videos. So,
thank you. All of you take care of yourselves.
Jai Hind.